---
title: "Episode 1 - The Power of Automation"
excerpt: "Automation is a key part of our world, which has unlocked massive gains for our daily lives. Many "
cover: "/images/episode_lair.jpeg"
date: "11th July 2024"
author:
  name: Andy Hale
  picture: "/assets/blog/authors/tim.jpeg"
ogImage:
  url: "/assets/blog/hello-world/cover.jpg"
---
I love automation. There I said it, I've announced my addiction to something that I just can't get over. Unfortunately, there's no automations annonymous I can confess this statement to, but maybe this blog post gets me close? Why am I so addicted to automation though? Addiction to something is hard, but somehow, being addicted to automation doesn't feel so bad or dirty. I feel like I can express my addiction without being ridiculed for admitting this. But why do I feel compelled to pursue this addiction at every cost and ultimately, why should you join me on this high of automating everything you can lay your hands on?

## It all starts with a quote
There is an often over-used quote from Albert Einstein, that the definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over and expecting different results. This quote I feel often gets misused, especially when it comes to the topic in question for me, which is business processes. In fact, when it comes to work/business, I will go on record and say that this quote is completely incorrect. Now, I am sure Albert Einstein when he made this quote, was referring to the scientific methodoloy of testing theorys and expecting different results if you completed the test in the exact same way. When it comes to business processes though, as stated, I believe in fact that the opposite of this quote is true. My personal quote, which I'm sure will never be quoted, is that the definition of insanity, is expecting the same result when asking people to complete tasks in a business with the exact same outcome at the end.

Business processes have many different goals, challenges, requirements etc. to produce a result. Ultimately, all processes are designed to produce a result for a business, most likely to generate some additional revenue, but it could be for a multitude of reasons. Processes are the backbone of any business but it amazes me how often processes are not understood by the business as a whole. The most important question with any process is understanding it's why, why does it exist? I find it funny the number of people that are the primary actors of a process, do not understand why it exists. 

## The most important question. Why?
Why is the most powerful question you can ask, unless you are 3 years old and asking why to everything. My nephew is currently in the why stage of life, and I always laugh when I am asked why to every response I give. But thinking about it, the reason that why stage exists in toddlers is ultimately about understanding the world. Over the years, we seem to ask why less and less, when maybe we should ask this more and more, if not externally, then at least internally to ourselves. The power of understanding why something is the way it is, gives you more power than understanding what someone is trying to achieve. Going even further down the philisophical train, knowing why you do something is more powerful than knowing what you do. Why do you work in your job, is more of a clearer guidance than what you do. Next time you learn about what job someone does, challenge the questioning with a why. Why do they do their job? You and they might find out some more interesting revelations about the world.

Steering the ship back to business automation and processes, why again is the ultimate question, and helps to dictate the solution to a problem. From personal experience, I was recently asked to add a new custom field to our CRM. Looking at the request, it was a very simple request, add a new drop down so someone could track some information. My first response though was why. Why do you need this information tracked? Why was this information not tracked before? Why is it now a requirement when it wasn't previously. Through asking why, I was able to determine that actually, this field didn't need to be added and the information could be gathered in another way. That may sound like I was being difficult, obstructing someone's request to satisfy their request. But the end goal was to provide the required information, in the most efficient way possible. For some people, adding a custom field on a CRM may be a simple and easy task, technically it's easy for me, but I have a limited number of custom fields, so every field added takes away future expandability. Saying yes without questioning in this example, would have meant somewhere down the line, saying no to a future request. Why ultimately gives us more insight into a process or requirement than any other words. It give's us the understanding to challenge a request, and not just fufil the given request. It's a question we should ask of anyone, whether they lead the company or work on the front lines, why do you do this, allows us to guide the best process for a company.

## Management controls and business processes
I have always found a process a double edged sword. Too often, the process is considered as just a process and time allocation for the people on the front line, actively repeating the steps of that process. However, an often overlooked part of this is the management controls or time allocations required for managers. We often look at a process and consider the time and effort required for the individual who will inact the process. There maybe no thought to how long it will take for managers or leadership to ensure that the processes are being followed. This effectively doubles the workload, a simple process can take 2 peoples schedules and double their effort and time requirements. The more manual a process is, generally the more manual it is to ensure that a process has been followed. For example, if you need to ensure that every phone call in, the person has been asked the same questions, without some software/automation, how do you make sure that those steps have been completed?

## Automation, our saviour
Every job I have ever had, I have tried to automate a task. As someone in the IT profession, my early (and continous) aims has been to make the process of setting up new hardware for employees as seamless as possible. When I started in IT, images were the baseline and were terrible, because the image was only as up to date as the last time someone made a new image. The longer they left it between generating new images, the longer it took us to build laptops/desktops because we had to go through increasing levels of updates. This caused myself a few issues, one it was an ever increasing time sink to build computers and secondly, it was creating more and more chances of failure. In that role, we had to hand over a checklist and device to a more "senior" person to confirm we had completed the build. Sometimes you would generally have missed a step, especially if you were working on multiple machines at the same time, other times you would get scolded for missing an update, when the update was only released after you had passed it over for checking. I vowed to spend some of my time trying to solve this problem.

Now, we are going back a few years here, to approximately 2008-2009, but my goal was to completely automate the entire new process of building computers with scripts. I did not have access to the imaging process, we didn't use SCCM, we didn't even use Outlook so had to use the shuddering thought of Lotus Notes. If we used all the right software, this process would have been simple/simpler, but working within the confines, I vowed to try and automate the process. I did not suceed, but I felt I had built something that got closer to the goal.

Today, I still try to achieve that end goal of a seamless user onboarding experience for devices. Microsoft's Autopilot has got me 90% of the way there, and with a few tweaks on my setup, I could get to almost 100% and get to that end goal that I set out, a seamless onboarding experience, with no requirement to confirm with someone that it is correct. Now, I find myself being the opposite side, I am the one that is supposed to check that devices are in the correct state. Microsoft's Autopilot, has been a game changer because I can deploy scripts and apps to confirm that it is setup correctly. Now I will admit, I am not 100% there yet, there is still more to change, but I have that vision of a completely seamless experience, and that is always the aim.

## Automation and buisness processes
Some of the examples I have given above have mentioned a rudimentary tactic for checking processes have been completed, the humble checklist. I often feel that inexperienced managers think this is the holy grail, that if a checklist exists, nothing can go wrong. Relating to the definition of insanity quote from previous, thinking that all processes can be rectified with a checklist is insane. Why is this this insane, well we only have to think about what checklists are controlling, not processes, but people. People, everyone, has the ability to make a mistake, to miss something in a list, to get confused with another piece of work, to have a bad day, to be compelled to complete something because of another factor. These human elements make us great from a culturual and community point of view, but for getting stuff done, the very thing that makes us great, makes us a problem.

We as humans have flaws, and often we forget that we employ other humans to make up for our failures. If you are a business owner, why do you hire people? Why do you hire IT people, sales people, marketing people etc. You may have experience and knowledge of one or two of those areas, but you hire people because you don't know how to do those other positions. Often, it is our understanding of ourselves, that allows us to to be more powerful. I, as an example, know that I don't like sending emails to the entire company, the all@ distribution list always has a fear. So I have a colleague who I know that doesn't have as much effect, that sending to that group doesn't trigger the same warnings in their brain as it does with me. Understanding our failures, allows us to put in place solutions to our own shortcomings.

Automation is a catch all, it takes all those business processes, and ensures we get as close to Einstein's quote as possible, that we complete tasks to the same result each time. It fills in the gaps in our own human brains that get distracted by conversations, bright lights, food brought in from a colleague or disagreements with other individuals. Automation takes a requirement, does it and gives us the result.

## Final Thoughts
Automation is such a powerful tool for business to embrace and adopt, and requires the correct level of understanding and governace to ensure that it fulfils the requirement of the business. Automation should be put in the hands of people that want to improve processes, that have that deeper understanding of how to generate results from requirements. Ensure that you utilise automation to fulfil those requirements.

Next week I will be following up with direct examples of automations covered by specific tools.
